>> Jason Pamental: Responsive type itself.
I'm gonna talk a little
bit about variable fonts.
So, September 12th, 2016,
this was at the A Type Eye Conference,
which is the largest,
sort of international conference for
the type and typography industry.
Four companies got up and introduced an
evolution to the OpenType specification,
OpenType 1.8, font variations.
And it was Microsoft, Google, Apple and
Adobe, all worked on this together
with input from Monotype and
many other individuals in the industry.
That was an evolution of this
OpenType specification that included
what I called different registered and
costumed axes of variation.
And this was a big deal for
a couple of reasons,
there had been two attempts at
creating some form of variable font.
Before, multiple masters in the 90s and
a similar time frame true type GX where
other attempts at creating a single
file that can act like many files.
Variable fonts is the first
one that really worked.
And it's also the first one to come about
when we have the web on which to use it.
And this where I find the most
significant benefits.
So rather than having all
of these separate files,
it's all together in a single file.
And you get all of these things together.
All the different widths,
all the different weights.
All the different x-heights,
if that's what somebody wants to create.
There are a whole bunch of different
axes that you can play with
if the type designer has exposed that and
build it into the typeface itself.
So it's an important
thing to keep in mind.
This is not stretching or
deforming a font.
It’s actually only using what
has been deliberately put there
by the typeface designer.
So it gives you a fairly safe playground
in which to play with these values.
You can also get slammed.
>> Jason Pamental: Now,
the notion of registered axes.
This is meant to map things back
to concepts that we already know.
So there are a small number of
registered axes, things like weight.
And you'll see, font weight,
that's kinda normal,
that's something that we're used to.
We're used to keywords, but we also
have those number values of 100 to 900,
that's what's typical in CSS.
What this allows us to do is vary
the weight numerically and animate it.
So it actually gives you
everything along that range.
And every typeface might have
a different set of values.
One might go from 100 to 1000.
Others might only go from 300 to 700.
But whatever the designer wants
to expose is gonna work, and
width works the same way.
So font stretch has never been
particularly useful before now,
it can actually be mapped to a true
variation from compressed or
condensed all the way out to extend
it in the width of that typeface.
>> Jason Pamental: Now, slant is
a little bit different than italic.
Slant is often referred to as oblique.
San Sarif typefaces are more often
going to have something like this,
where there are no changes in
the letter form shapes just the angle.
And so by being able to specify
that in a number of degrees,
we could actually oblique
that text a specific amount.
It doesn't always have to be all on or
all off, and
you could also animate
the states in between.
Italics is a little different.
So we have font style oblique and
degrees, or font style normal or italic.
This is either on or off.
But if you pay attention to
the lower case a, in particular,
when this shifts over to italic, you can
see that even the glyph changed itself.
So the shape of the a is swapped out for
a totally different one.
So that actually brings
up an important point.
These axes don't have to be a continuum.
They can either be on or
off or have steps in between.
Again, however the typeface designer
has decided to make this work.
>> Jason Pamental: Now optical size
is the fifth registered access.
It also requires a little
bit more understanding.
I'll get into this a little
bit more later on,
but the main thing you want to
take away from here is this
optical sizing is about appropriate for
the size at which it's being displayed.
So you'll pay attention when I click
a button here, watch the thick and
thin in the stroke contrast, as
the physical size of the type gets bigger.
See how the strokes in the lowercase a and
the n, and the connecting points
in the d or the crossbar in the H.
See how much thicker that
is at the smaller size.
That's intended to keep it readable
at a physically smaller size.
So initially, when people were making
metal type they would do this so
that when you're printing something on
a newspaper, the details don't disappear.
And because there was finite limitations
to the actual technology of printing it,
we have a similar consideration
with screens for phones.
As it's a physically smaller size, you
wanna make sure that it's still sharp and
crisp and
doesn't lose any of those fine details.
So optical sizing is really useful there.
But the interesting thing about this
format is that it's completely extensible.
So a typeface designer can create
whatever axis they want, and
as long as they expose it with
that four letter abbreviation,
then expose a number range or whatever
values they want to allow people to
supply, you can do all
kinds of other things.
So one of the more common ones is grade.
And there's a notion in text that
increases the contrast between the text
and the background without changing
the physical space that the text occupies.
So if you think about ambient light or
people with low vision,
being able to increase the grade of the
text creates something that's a little bit
more readable or stands apart from
the background a little bit more.
Without doing something really obvious or
reflowing.
That could also be really
useful in UI animation.
So if you wanna make something
bolder without changing the physical
characteristics of all the stuff
around it, it makes it really easy.
One of the touches that I was
showing you earlier as I was
resizing one of those pages, were
things about ascenders and descenders.
Watch what happens with the axes
that we have here in Amstelvar.
We can control the height and depth
of those ascenders and descenders, so
when we want to set text closer together,
we don't get those collisions between
the upper and lowercase letters.
>> Jason Pamental: Now, this is more of
a demonstration of how ridiculous you
can be.
Deck of R is in no way intended
to be a production typeface, but
it does show you just how extreme
some of the variations can be.
And while that may not be necessarily
readable, it's still regular text,
that would still be read by
a screen reader, no problem at all.
Or you could create
an accessibility setting where
you might have something
that's very decorative, but
if somebody has a hard time,
that might be able to click a button and
then have it actually revert back to
something that's a bit more standard.
So things like this actually
challenge the notion of
what typography is in the first place.
So it's not just setting text on screen
and making things in understandable size
hierarchies, it's actually how much do you
want to change that experience over time?
How much do you want to create that
emotional tie that actually can change?
There's another typeface,
I'll have to look for a link to it.
That was shared with me by another foundry
where the access that they've created
was time, so that you could along the axis
and animated, it would draw the letters.
That was really interesting and
you could either draw them all at once or
draw them one after another.
So in animating that, actually having a
message that kind of draws itself out, but
the text is actually all there
instantly for a screen reader or
for SEO purposes,
that's pretty remarkable.
So you can create that effect without
compromising the things that make
the web, the web.
>> Jason Pamental: This is
what it looks like inside.
So this is sort of the exploded view.
So if you see the most defined shape, is
the regular dimensions of the character.
And the way the font format works,
is it stores deltas, or
point differences from
one extreme to the other.
So you can see that those points
move up and out for a wider,
even heavier stroke, and also thin.
So if you kinda look closely at this,
there's the very thinnest,
narrowest shape as well as
the narrowest fattest shape.
And all those points are stored
inside the font file itself.
And the browser can then interpolate
between the placement of those points.
So that way as you slide the long or
with throw away access,
you have these points to go by and
figure out how to draw that character and
maintain the integrity of
the shapes themselves.
Now it's not without this complication,
it is tricky to say at least,
it's a lot of work for the type designers
but it creates a typeface that can
be use in infinitely more ways than
anything currently in existence.
So instead of there being
18 different weights for
something, you really have hundreds.
You can explore whatever
in-between state that you want.
And it allows us to modulate
the weight of headings
that's appropriate to
the size of the text.
So instead of only having one heavier
weight that we use at 18 pixels,
24 pixels, 36, 48 and
it gets sort of increasingly muddy or
increasingly spindly as it gets bigger.
We could have slightly different
weights all along and that way,
you'd have greater clarity and greater
expressiveness by being able to dial in to
exactly what you want to establish
that typographic hierarchy.